we open with my favorite catchphrase if
I look exhausted it's because I am
exhausted we just flew into Victoria
British Columbia Canada from Detroit I
got a letter from viewer asking me about
the wildlife management approach to
veganism one of the ideas I've been
talking about on this channel for years
and he was asking specifically about how
my thoughts apply to hunting will say
why that is and what his interest was
when I searched my own channel it's been
more than two years since I said
anything about hunting so some of you
may have been watching this channel for
two years already had never heard me
comment on hunting one way or another
I thought he asked a good question and
it's something other people might be
confused about especially given how long
ago was that I really kind of debated
discussed explained it did Q&A videos
talking about these ideas many vegans
are accustomed to criticizing the meat
and dairy industry in terms of the
profit motive and I guess what makes
this issue of the ethics of hunting
different for the guy sending in the
question is that the profit motive is
removed and that there is a kind of
Ethel pardon me a kind of ecological
justification offered in the United
States of America many people justify
eating deer by claiming that the deer
are too numerous they're overpopulated
and therefore it's inevitable that the
deer have to be killed anyway and if
it's inevitable that people have to kill
the deer then they argue they say why
not eat the deer why not make a sport
out of killing them why not
why not even make a for profit industry
and if killing them why not make their
skin into garments so and so forth now
probably you can already tell by the way
I'm framing this question I don't agree
with any of those statements it may be
inevitable that you have to kill a thief
a robber who comes through the window of
your home and to try to burgle you to
try to steal your belongings now ideally
you might have a non-lethal way to
tranquilize the thief but
let's say in these circumstances you
shoot and kill a thief how many thieves
are killed per year this way it's
inevitable people are going to be shot
for home invasions what what would that
justify what further steps ethically
would be justified eating them raping
them and slaving them taking their skin
and making into a an articling no none
of it absolutely none of it because the
necessity of killing the thief in the
home invasion the disgust 'ti is only by
sheer dint of self-defense it's by those
immediate circumstances right and if if
the necessity of killing deer or the
necessity of killing rats or the
necessity necessity of killing wolves if
that really is a necessity created by
ecology then again that that
justification is exhausted with the act
of killing and we have no justification
for anything further on the contrary I'm
quite comfortable and saying that it's
evil to eat the deer that you killed I
think it's quite evil to make a sport to
make a game out of it I think would be
evil to make a sport out of killing a
human being it breaks in your house too
to make a game of it to make so well if
you're gonna shoot this robber if you're
gonna shoot this in this home invader
why not make a game of it why not make
it fun why not invite your neighbor to
come over for a thief's hunting party
why not try to make money out of it why
not try to make it skin into leather
this is evil
now it's also true that we have
questions of greater and lesser evil but
these things I mean I can make them more
closely comparable here in Canada it
does happen that Bears break into
people's houses I've said this before on
the channel bears forced their way
through a window often a basement window
and then they're in the person's
basement and they found food or garbage
and they're tearing it apart and can't
get the bear back out and it may be that
you call animal control and the
government is not going to help you and
the police aren't going to help you or
if the police do come to help you
they're just gonna shoot the bear and
kill it anyway it may be that there
no a simple matter of using a
tranquilizer dart or you know some kind
of technique you may have imagined or
seen in a Batman comic book to remove
the bear without hurting it it may
indeed be inevitable even if tragic the
human beings kill bears when those bears
break into a human beings house but even
if the act of killing is justified
nothing further is justified and I have
to insist on this if we kill rats in an
apartment building for human convenience
fundamentally this is being done for
human convenience if we kill seagulls at
an airport so that airplanes can take
off and land on the runway with a
difficulty that is fundamentally for
human convenience these are human values
being imposed animals and I admit and
whether we regard it as tragic or not
this is inevitable it is absolutely
inevitable that airports kill birds on
and around runways it's inevitable that
we kill rats in big cities and different
paths facilities and the fact that it's
inevitable doesn't mean it can't be
reduced in number if there actually are
really important steps we can take to
reduce the number of rats living in
cities you can see that in Europe I
won't get into details but you can see
ant just even installing different kinds
of spring-loaded plastic flaps over
storm drains it's amazing what a
difference it can make you can go from
having millions of rats to having only a
few thousand in a city by just trying to
make drainage systems stop having high
use of rats living in storm drain today
there are things you can do and that's
very often the difference in a first
world city in a third world city or
exactly those steps taken to reduce the
number of rats and cockroaches living in
sewage systems and such things that are
creative again for human convenience but
my third example here is that you have a
forest forest being managed by human
beings it could be a national park
Wildlife Sanctuary however you want to
put it the forest exists
for the sake of the animals that are
living at the forest exists for the sake
of biodiversity ecology wildlife
conservation nevertheless
if you make the decision that you have
to kill some of the deer or you have to
kill let's say better example human
beings make the decision that they're
gonna kill some of the wolves because if
they don't kill the wolves the wolves
are gonna drive another species to
extinction through predation or through
crowding them out in the limited
ecosystem this example also is an
example of killing animals for human
convenience ultimately there is no
balance in nature we have a human
concept of balance in the ecosystem that
we're trying to create its sustain and
we're choosing to create and sustain
that through violence the same way that
we create and sustain a field of wheat
on a wheat farm through constant
violence against groundhogs and
squirrels other creatures that want to
come in and burrow and dig tunnels and
change the ecology in order to eat the
food we're planting or just just to
create their own habitat out of it
instead so on and so forth so this is
all fundamentally about acts of violence
for human convenience they are
ultimately on the same level human
beings need to eat bread so we're gonna
grow wheat and therefore it's inevitable
that we're gonna kill groundhogs just as
I said before Bo rats or even when I
said about using tranquilizers and bears
I think there are steps we can take to
reduce the number of groundhogs were
killing and right now in Western society
nobody's taking that seriously nobody's
taking seriously an ethical
responsibility to try to reduce the
number of mammals being killed to
produce wheat but we could and there
were steps we can use to reduce the
number of rats were killing but I
completely concede the point the number
is going to be greater than zero but
what I don't accept is the idea that you
can make it
to a sport that you can make it into a
game you can make it into a food
industry or a food product or that you
should enjoy eating that food
I think our you can make the skin into a
products make it a leather no I reject
all of that and I would reject it for
human beings in the in the same
situation so the fellow who wrote in to
me who does not support me on patreon
please support the creation of new
content in this channel for $1 a month
on patreon give a link below he says
that he is not an ecologist and cannot
properly scrutinize the hunting as
conservation arguments I have a real
simple reply to that this is why it's
called vegan mind trick hunting is not
conservation conservation is
conservation nothing else it's
conservation do you want to start a
charity and do conservation is that what
you want to do you want to donate money
for constable what do you what do you
want to do you want to save the Dolphins
you want to restore riverbanks what what
does conservation mean okay and what do
you want to do oh you want to take a
vacation and catch salmon or shoot buck
and kill them and melt their head on
your wall that's not it's not kind of
conservation is it what what does
conservation science mean to you what
does a conservation charity do what does
the word conservation mean I use a kind
of aggressive Socratic method here of
trying to get down to the real meaning
of the terms but no nothing else is
conservation and I'm very practicing to
having those kinds of arguments because
when I worked in the humanitarian sector
a lot of time you've retired but what
what do we really mean by humanitarian
work guys what a really really time yeah
so he says I agree with you that
unfortunately at least some animals are
going to have to die at our discretion
but I'm not sure what a practical stance
is to take on recreational hunting and
laws pertaining to it should culling be
restricted to wildlife management
personnel and
systems hunters only so there's an
interesting thing there so he's alluding
to he does earlier in the text to
there's the issue of ecology there's the
issue of profit motive versus no profit
motive so the fact that unlike factory
farming this isn't being done for a
profit and at least hypothetically could
be talking about indigenous tribal
people who are doing this to survive not
for a profit in a in a cashless society
in theory in reality this is 2018
namadeva
and he asks would the deaths have more
dignity if we sought to use the meat or
remains of such animals whenever
possible in one stance it can lead to
the view of the animals as products but
in the other stance we're wasting the
animals so that I think is the third
point that I already have answered so I
already answer the guy in text form and
I'll just say I mean maybe the last
things first the final point I make in
my reply to them in text is ultimately
is racist
even if unintentionally racist if you
say that you would make excuses for an
indigenous person eating meat or
engaging in hunting that you wouldn't
make for a white person a black person
and Hispanic person a Chinese person if
you just think of yourself actually
living in those circumstances I used to
know a lot of indigenous people a lot of
First Nations people when I was at First
Nations University in Saskatchewan um if
you actually know people who are Korean
a jib way and Mohawk if you know them
and you talk to them and if you're not a
racist [ __ ] if you're gonna talk to
them as equals ultimately what you tell
them about eating meat is gonna be the
same as what you tell a Chinese person
or a black person or a white person why
would you dumb it down or be dishonest
or make moral excuses for them if you're
talking them as a friend and if you care
about them I mean it's the same as
caring about a cohort
or even a relative you know you may have
friends who were in that world and
they're badly overweight and he's saying
look your health is falling apart I hate
to tell you this but this traditional
lifestyle you talk about it's killing
you and here are the hard scientific
facts of course you would say that of
course if you know someone and care
about them and most people watching this
video have been to that scenario and you
may have been through that scenario with
a black person and a white person a
Chinese person so it's not any different
if there are some other ethnicity now
that's of course the example I just use
was of addressing it in terms of the
health element I can say the same again
about addressing the ecology the ecology
argument is exactly the same doesn't
matter from talking to a black person or
white person etc or an indigenous person
if I'm gonna discuss ecology with them
I'm not gonna lie to them because of
their ethnicity that also would be evil
and finally the ethical argument I don't
I don't believe epics are different for
black people and white people because
I'm not racist I mean if if anyone
really believe that thought there was a
different ethical system for different
for different races I be a very bizarre
and overt form of racism I think the
majority people who really are racist
it's never even occurred to them to
think in those terms so I answered him
as follows I'll read this a little bit
quickly totally reasonable question
number one I am NOT Pro hunting however
number two I am willing to admit whereas
some vegans are not that when you
compare hunting to factory farming it is
the lesser of two evils but three the
lesser of two evils is still evil
interestingly for I would not repeat not
regarded as ethical to eat an animal
that was doomed to be killed by human
needs anyway for example if you need to
kill seagulls to make it safe for
airplanes to land at an airport I do not
think you should proceed to make a food
product of the seagulls now explain this
playing this video however five my
position in just admitting point number
two that there in
is a meaningful difference between an
animal living its whole life in the wild
living in a pack exploring in the forest
in the jungle whatever the kids may be
living its whole life in the wild even
if in the end it is shot dead as opposed
to living in captivity in a factory farm
on a concrete floor under a steel sky
surrounded by fences etc etc the fact
that I am willing to admit this is still
a significant source of debate amongst
vegans some vegans regard hunting as
more evil or as more sinful using sinful
and adjusting manner some regard hunting
as more sinful than the passive
consumption of factory farmed meat and
this is similar to Hindu and Buddhist
attitudes in many of those religions
they think of doing something
intentionally and knowingly as a worse
crime or as a worse sin than just
participating in it through ignorance
and passively on an aesthetic level
I really feel the other way about it I
find it less repugnant that a hunter
kills in butchers a wild animal himself
or herself
I find that less Republik repugnant than
the millions of people I see around me
who are kidding themselves that factory
farm meat is you know necessary and
normal as part of their daily lives and
were very often a deep state of denial
and cognitive dissonance as to how that
animal died and and what it really means
the slit and animal's throat and tear
the pieces of the tear the pieces of its
body apart for food but these this is
into the realm of aesthetics and not
ethics and not science um some vegans
regard vivisection as the ultimate sin
etc so that is also an interesting thing
if you just think about the pyramid of
priorities what vegans think of as the
objective of their activism what they
think of as their enemy or their hurdles
the obstacles they're gonna overcome mmm
you can actually define some different
sub movements than veganism by thinking
about this event and then 0.6 as I've
already stated was that I do say that it
is ultimately even if unintentionally
racist to make excuses for indigenous
peoples eating meat to talk to them
really in any other way than how you
talk to a white person in Hispanic
person a Chinese person or or what have
you so what is the point why do we have
multiple competing approaches to
veganism
well Gary Fran Sione created what was
called the abolitionist approach to try
to address and overcome absurdities real
absurdities that arose from the approach
that existed before him which he likes
to call the welfarist approach and it's
true
the welfarist approach to veganism it
has some advantages it has some vendors
it also has some disadvantages and in
certain contexts those disadvantages
start to look ridiculous
now by the same token I mean a very
simple principle the principle that some
people would say this I do not say that
some people would say veganism means
never killing any animals some people
would say regarding animals is all
having a soul and a moral worth you go
to a human being and and never killing
any animals well that leads to some
absurdities such as we've already talked
about killing rats to prevent
infestation
killing seagulls especially right at an
airport or what they're blocking a radar
array killing cockroaches just so that
you don't have a cup of kitchen infested
with cockroaches all these issues down
the line a very simple principle if
carried out in a thoroughgoing and
consistent way can lead to absurdities
of this kind and the wildlife management
paradigm wildlife management approach to
veganism in contrast the abolitionist
approach in contrast to the welfarist
approach it starts by saying look
utilitarianism
leads to certain absurdities and this is
a segue my recent videos have talked
about our natural vegan or utilitarian
approach
utilitarians would really claim that
there's nothing wrong with wearing
second-hand leather because it
quote-unquote doesn't do any harm or the
harm is already done utilitarians would
claim that there's nothing wrong with
eating meat if you're gonna kill the
rats anyway if you're gonna kill the
seagulls anyway so on and so forth if
you've already killed a bear that broke
into your house you might as well eat it
this is one example not the only one of
it the type of absurdity that
utilitarianism gets into but very
broadly speaking almost every approach
in veganism I can think of one exception
almost every approach at the time I got
involved in veganism when I really
started talking about it and thinking
about and reading about it trying to
organize activism almost every approach
was fixated on the idea of a pet dog on
the carpet as the moral baseline and
unnatural vegan Swayze she's a great
example of this her standard for how how
all animals must be treated ought to be
treated her standard for what's normal
and for what every animal deserves is
that every animal deserves to be treated
she says like a dog lying on the carpet
watching TV and I say the exact opposite
I think that to take a wolf and chop its
testicles off literally castrate it
train it break its will destroy its
independence cut it off from its own
species never allow it to live in a pack
never allow it to explore the wilderness
to take a wolf and turn it into a human
toy to turn it into a plaything for our
amusement for our diversion for our
quote-unquote emotional needs I don't
think we have those emotional needs I
think that's just as ridiculous as
saying that you need cocaine for your
emotional needs there are a lot of
things people think they need you don't
really need you don't need a dog to
watch television with you you don't
[Laughter]
and that dog doesn't need you to enslave
it so it can lie there like a living
carpet well you watch television
it's sick broadly speaking every
approach to veganism including Gary
Francie on his abolitionist approach
they had settled in on this idea of pet
ownership caring for Encarta lling pets
as their moral baseline and I rejected
that and said no we got to get back to
the wilderness we've got a look at
animals living independent dignified
lives in the wild which includes a
dignified death we've got to look at
that as the baseline from which we
derive our ethical and political
principles there's a whole playlist of
videos you want to hear more but you may
not need to hear more this video may
have told you everything you need to
know now let's roll up our sleeves and
save the planet pay $1 a month support
me on patreon or don't send me email get
in touch with me however you want to get
in touch with me I'm going through a
really difficult transition in my life I
don't know where I'm gonna be living six
months from now I'd say I'm running my
fingers through my hair but I don't have
any hair to run my fingers through I'm
really you know turning the phone book
upside down and going through all
different options a through Zed to
figure out what I'm doing with my life
because my plans for my career for how I
was gonna pay my rent and for how I was
gonna pursue vegan activism they all
hinged on going to culinary school then
ultimately opening up a bakery and
within the last month that all fell
apart I'm having to make whole new plans
so guys I've had a lot of initiative
I've tried to start quite a few
different projects going in vegan
activist in the last four years and you
know what I haven't heard from any of
you I don't hear from anyone in my
audience inviting me to participate in
something you've started whether that's
you know something as humble as giving a
lecture at a veg fest or participating
or joining something you do but guys you
know I'm only a leader because I don't
have the luxury of being a follower by
all means get in touched me whether or
not you donate to the channel and let's
let's start living our life
as if we really were trying to save the
planet